Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always, Ricard Loops. And
today I'm joined by Grace Blakely, author, journalist, political
commentator. And we're talking about her latest book, Vulture
Capitalism, corporate Crimes backdoor bailouts and the Death of
Freedom. So, Grace, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having me. It's great to be here.
So the first thing I would like to get
into when it comes to your book is that
uh one thing is how capitalism actually works. And
another thing is what people commonly think. I mean,
what are their common ideas about how it works?
So, before we get into some of the examples
you explore in the book to illustrate how capitalism
works and some of the tactics that capitalists have
to sort of exploit the system or make the
system work in their favor. Uh What would you
say? Or perhaps some of the most common ideas
that people have about or what they think cap
uh how they think capitalism works.
Yeah. So I suppose I wanted to write this
book to address some of those misconceptions about how
capitalism works. Um And I think the first and
most prominent one is this idea that um capitalism
is like a free market system. Um And a
system in which um the, the state is completely
separate from the market. So you have this idea
that in capitalist societies, you have economies that are
governed by the principles of free market economics. And
then you have governments that exist separate to those
economies that kind of regulate the free market. Um
And the idea is that if the government gets
too big relative to the economy, then that becomes
socialism effectively. So this idea that capitalism is, is
a free market economy and socialism is a big
state deciding everything. Um And I think those misconceptions
come back to the legacy of the Cold War,
basically when you had uh the US, which painted
itself as this kind of free market utopia. Um
And the US sr where you did have a
centrally planned economy where the state uh kind of
determined the production and allocation of resources. Um So
I wanted to kind of really respond to that
uh that misconception that a lot of people have.
Um And I did that by looking both at
whether or not capitalism is a free market system
and also the role of the state within capitalist
economies. Um So in the book, I show that,
you know, capitalism isn't a free market system. Um
And that the state actually has a very significant
role in determining what goes on in capitalist economies.
And the example I use is uh to start,
the book is Boeing. So, uh some of your
readers, uh some of your listeners, sorry, might remember
the Boeing 737 max disasters which took place um
in about 2018, 2019. Uh AND in those disasters,
two Boeing planes fell out of the sky killing
nearly 350 people in two separate plane crashes. Um
And there were lots of investigations that went on
into why this had happened. It ultimately transpired that
senior executives at Boeing had known about the problems
with this plane before uh the crashes took place.
Um, AND had done nothing about it despite the
fact that there had been whistleblowers coming forward, there
had been people within the firm saying this plane
is unsafe, we cannot bring it to market. But
the senior executives and this company said, nope, we're
gonna do that anyway. Um And to understand how
this this disaster and this kind of, you know,
corruption of what was once a kind of great
American firm took place. You have to understand firstly,
that Boeing wasn't operating in a free market context.
And secondly, that it is deeply enmeshed with the
American State. So firstly, Boeing doesn't operate in a
free market. It is um it operates in a,
a duopoly. So basically there are two large firms,
Boeing and Airbus that dominate um the aviation industry.
Uh THERE'S, you know, there is competition between those
two firms. Um BUT it is a very specific
type of competition. It's not the kind of competition
that you would expect within a free market system
where there's lots of small producers competing to produce
things and the pressures of competition keep prices down.
Um And you know, it's a maximally efficient system
instead you have these two big firms. Um AND
they are competing to keep costs down as low
as possible. Um So that means kind of underpaying
workers making sure unions don't get recognized, cutting corners
in production as we saw with Boeing. Um AND
uh generally kind of stripping out as much cost
as possible to maximize their profits. It also means
that they pursue other avenues to try and consolidate
their market power. So, for example, um you know,
getting favorable deals with governments um making deals with
airline carriers. Uh So Boeing had this deal with
Southwest airline provider um that uh basically kind of,
you know, allowed it to uh maintain uh production
and, and, and ensure demand was maintained. Um So
you kind of have deal making that goes on
quite a lot within this context. Um And uh
also this close relationship with the state. Um Now,
Boeing was one of the biggest recipients of corporate
welfare in the US in 20. Uh I think
it was 2018 and that has continued. So it
receives massive subsidies, tax breaks huge amounts of support
from the American State. It also has a lot
of contracts with the US, states with different parts
of the state, with, you know, the Pentagon Department
of Defense, etcetera. Uh, AND so, um, the US
government has been very involved in the Boeing scandals
since they've, since they've started, um, in the sense
that, you know, the regulator was really asleep at
the wheel during the 737 max disasters. Boeing was
actually being regulated by, um, a unit of the
Federal Aviation Authority that sat inside Boeing and whose
workers were being paid by Boeing. So it was
effectively regulating itself. Um And it was receiving all
this money from the government even after the 737
max disasters during the COVID-19 pandemic. Um The US
state distributed a huge amount of money to Boeing.
Um, AFTER all of these scandals had come to
light, even after it had been charged with a
criminal conspiracy to defraud the United States, it still
got all this money from the government. Um And
so I think what this shows, you know, this
is the context in which the, the disasters took
place, right? It was um, a monopolistic market structure
in which Boeing was operating where it had no
real discipline from the market, no accountability from regulating
because regulators were so close to it and no
democratic accountability from the US state because, you know,
Boeing's lobbyists were working in all different areas of
the United States uh government um to get contracts
to change legislation, to change regulation. Uh And all
that means is that you have this massive powerful
firm that is effectively insulated from any accountability. It
doesn't have accountability from the market cos there's not
as much competition and it doesn't have accountability from
the States. And it just means that basically the
senior executives of these really big firms are able
to kind of plan who gets what even though
this is supposed to be a free market economy
where nobody can plan anything because the market is
supposed to decide. Um So that I think in
another number of other examples, shows this lie that
capitalism means free markets. It doesn't, it means a
kind of uh it means basically massive corporate power.
Um THE power of large firms over the rest
of society that isn't constrained by the market. And
that isn't really constrained by the power of the
state as well. It's kind of this toxic fusion
of public and private power in service of maximizing
the wealth and power of people at the top.
So let's talk more about it, that idea or
that misconception that people have or that capitalists promote
that we actually have a free market. I mean,
whatever that means because for me, at least it's
always been weird how, what, how with an actual
free market would work without any state intervention, any
state regulation, enforcement of contracts and all of that.
But, but anyway, we can also get into that
later. But um in what ways are businesses planned?
And I think it's very important for us to
address that question here because uh since this is
a very common misconception, people actually tend to believe
that businesses are not planned just because business owners
and other people like that. Say so,
yeah. So to understand this argument that I have
about planning, we need to understand as you were
saying, what a free market should look like, right?
And like if you pick up an economics textbook,
what are they going to tell you the free
market looks like? And the idea is that you
have um lots of similar producers all producing the
same commodity, let's say in a market for, I
don't know, um like cars. So you've got lots
of different producers, all producing their own cars. Um
AND they um are competing with each other on
costs and on prices so that if one firm
produces cars less efficiently than another firm, there are
loads of other car firms that produce cars more
efficiently at a lower cost. So no consumers buy
the car of this inefficient firm. And the pressures
of competition mean that the inefficient firm goes out
of business and only the efficient firms survive. Uh
And that is supposed to be how a free
market economy maximizes efficiency. It's the pressure of competition
means that only the most efficient producers are able
to survive. Um BECAUSE the others out compete, uh
outcompete the less efficient ones. Um So anything that
kind of gets in the way of that competitive
pressure undermines this kind of free market uh idea
basically. Um And what we see in kind of
modern capitalist economies is that it doesn't look like
that at all. So we don't have lots and
lots of little firms all competing to produce things.
You know, the only context in which that's really
true is if you look at like a local
market in your town there, you have little, you
know, producers competing to produce things, right? That is
like a, a kind of free market. But if
you look at production of the important commodities like
cars, for example, um like airplanes, whatever, then you
have a number of large and powerful producers um
that are, that have very close links with governments.
Um AND which are to a greater or lesser
extent insulated from competition. Um So, you know, there
are barriers to entry, which mean that new firms
struggle to come in. Um There are regulatory barriers.
Um There are cost pressures. Um And there are
these kind of these links between firms and states
that keep existing firms within the market. And mean
that even if you aren't the most efficient firm
in your sector, you can often survive anyway because
you can ask the government for a bailout or
you can just buy up your competitors. For example,
if like a new competitor threatens you, you can
use all your cash to buy that firm and
integrate it into your firm, you have better access
to, to finance because you probably have a very
close relationship with big banks. So the banks will
be more likely to lend you money. Um And
all of these things mean that you're kind of
insulated from competition. Um So you don't have this
pressure of the market that is keeping firms um
operate, operating at the most efficient level. Um And
which is kind of making sure that um like
competition continues to hold sway over, over the economy,
you just, you, you lose that and in its
place, uh rather than having kind of competition, you
have a, a form of, of economic planning, basically
co in this competitive scenario, nobody can really plan
like the leaders of all these little firms, they
can't plan, they can't um make long term decisions
because they don't know what the future of that
free market system is gonna look like. They don't
know what all of the other actors in that
system, they don't know how they're gonna behave. Um
And if they make a decision that goes against
the market, that kind of undermines um efficiency, for
example, then they'll go out of business. Like if,
if a manager makes the wrong decision, let's say
he starts producing cars in a way that's more
expensive than his competitors, then his firm will go
under. So he doesn't really have any power within
that system. He's very much constrained by what the
market says you should do. Whereas in the economy
that we live, because you have all these barriers
around firms that come from politics that come from
finance that come from their relationship with other firms.
Um ECONOMIES of scale, all of these things. It
means that the managers within those firms have a
lot of power to plan, even if they make
the wrong decision and they mess up, like for
example, they did at Boeing, the firm isn't going
to collapse because it can rely on the fact
that it's got friends in the government. Uh It
can rely on its size, it can rely on
its its relationship with financial institutions um to make
sure that that firm stays alive even if everything
has kind of, even if its managers have have
made a series of really bad decisions. And so
that idea that the people at the top of
the most powerful firms have the power to plan,
kind of undermines this idea that we live in
a free market system. And it also um it
really kind of undermines this idea that we live
in a, in a true democracy, right? Because firstly,
a huge amount of um decision making about the
world in which we live takes place within firms.
Now, in a free market scenario, it doesn't really
matter because the market is, is telling everyone what
to do, they don't have any power. But in
the, in the world that we live, these people
do have power, they're making decisions over what innovations
are taking place where investment is going. Um, YOU
know, which country they're being located in the wages,
they're paying work. All of these questions are being
decided by powerful people at the top of big
firms without any accountability. So they don't have discipline
for the market and they don't have democratic accountability
because they also use their power to lobby governments
to make sure that those governments do what they
say. So instead, you have really big powerful firms
that don't have market accountability, don't have democratic accountability
and are instead just planning our world based on
their own interests. You see this in the fossil
fuel industry, for example, Exxonmobil is one of the
biggest um fossil fuel producers uh in the world.
Scientists are Exxonmobil knew about climate breakdown, knew about
the impact that burning fossil fuels would have as
far back as the 19 seventies. So instead of
spreading the word about that, Exxonmobil took funding out
of its climate research team and used that funding
to uh spread climate denialism. So to say climate
burning fossil fuels doesn't cause climate breakdown. Um And
to lobby the US government, you know, Exxon's former
CEO eventually got a very senior position in the
US government under Trump. So there was this really
close link between Exxon and the US State. And
now, you know, they're still, they were caught, but
Exxon lobbyist was caught on camera talking to a
Greenpeace reporter saying we're, we've won massive results um
by lobbying various different governments. They were saying that
they were lobbying for a carbon tax on the
basis that they knew a carbon tax was never
gonna happen. So it was a way of kind
of undermining the fight against climate breakdown.
Sorry for interrupting you there. But I, I mean,
actually it's not that we do not have several
different examples of that same sort of thing you're
describing there because of course, the biggest ones tend
to come from the US. But another example would
be all tobacco companies deal with what they, they
already knew were the health consequences of smoking cigars,
smoking tobacco cigarettes and all of that and they
uh hid it from the public.
Right. Yeah, exactly. And so, you know, that decision
was taken by leading figures within the the tobacco
industry to push smoking and everyone else has had
to deal with the consequences of that decision. And
there's been no accountability. There's been no way to
say you took the wrong decision, we're holding you
to account, right. You know, instead they were just
able to, they made billions and billions of dollars
of basically making people really ill. And it's the
same with, with climate breakdown. So basically this creates
this problem. We don't live in a free market
economy. There's not enough democratic accountability. Um So how
do we hold the powerful to account, how do
we start to take control over our economy and
over our society?
Yeah. And we're going to get into that question
later on in our conversation. But let me just
ask you because this is also uh a topic
that you explore in the book. And I'm personally
also very interested in when it comes to relations
between employers and employees, between capitalists and labor in
the capitalist system and the history of labor, labor
movements. It seems, please correct me if I'm wrong.
But it seems very obvious to me that particularly
from the 19th century onwards, if it wasn't for
workers organizing themselves, organizing collectives to strike protest and
try to pressure capitalists and governments to create labor
laws to increase minimum wages, to ameliorate working conditions,
to get more benefits and stuff like that. That
would have never happened alone. I mean, at least
that's what it seems to me looking back in
history and the, the common idea that we hear
from many uh capitalists, from many people who economically
fall more on the liberal side of the spectrum
is that, oh, if the market was just more,
uh it was just freer, if we were able
to do things more freely, then it would just
so happen eventually that workers would get higher wages,
more benefits and all of that kind of good
stuff. But is that really true?
Yeah. So this idea again, relies on uh the
world view that liberals have, which rests on this
idea of the free market. So it doesn't just
apply to consumers. It also applies to workers. You
know, the idea is if one firm offers lower
wages, bad conditions and another firm offers higher wages
and better conditions, workers will leave this firm and
go to that firm. Um Now that kind of
doesn't really account for a lot of different factors
like, you know, whether or not this firm is,
is hiring enough workers, whether or not there's enough
jobs to go around, whether or not, you know
what kind of employment contracts, uh These workers are
under um whether or not they're able to move
around the country, like around the world, all these
different things, co workers have far less power. Uh
But you know, this is allegedly how free markets
are supposed to work. The issue with the kind
of economy that we live in is that we
have not only monopoly power but also what's called
monotony power. And that means when a firm is
not just the largest seller in the market, but
it is by far the largest buyer in a
market including a buyer of labor. So when one
firm dominates the labor market in a particular area,
it basically has the power to just set wages,
to just set conditions. Amazon for example, in certain
areas of the country employs, you know, nearly 50%
of workers in a particular small area. So all
all the working conditions will be set by Amazon
in that area because basically it has such power
over the labor market. Um And that really undermines
this idea that, you know, you have this free
market for labor where workers can kind of move
around. But the kind of deeper and more fundamental
issue here um is the question of the balance
of power within society. So I don't have this
free market, liberal interpretation of the capitalist economy. I
have a Marxist interpretation of the capitalist economy which
means that rather than seeing it as a system
that's based on free markets and exchange and that
sort of thing, um I argue that capitalism is
a system based on the class division of society.
So Marx starts his argument by like looking at
Adam Smith, David Ricardo, all of these theorists who
said capitalism is great because it creates, you know,
it's based on this free market system which, you
know, maximizes efficiency. Um YOU know, creates wealth for
everyone creates progress, et cetera. Uh BECAUSE they were
all studying exchange, they were studying what takes place
within markets. Mark said it's not enough to study
what takes place within the market. You have to
look at how the commodities that are being sold
in that market were produced. So you have to
go back into the firm and look at what
goes on within the firm, which is not something
that the early political economists did. And so remarked
at the firm, he discovered this division of labor.
So there's this division between owners who own all
of the means of production and workers who are
forced to sell their labor power for a wage.
And then a kind of strata of managers on
top who are paid by the owners to kind
of manage the workforce. And this is like this
is the, the class division of society. It's the
social division of labor. Um AND it creates, it
is based on an inherent balance, imbalance of power.
So there are a small number of people who,
for whatever reason, own everything, they own the land,
they own resources, they have, you know, political power
and they are able to use that to uh
um you know, create businesses that other people are
then forced to work in. Now, workers don't have
that power, they have to sell their labor power
in order to survive, right? Because, you know, we
don't have service with agriculture anymore, whatever. Um So
they're, they're forced to work for these people who
own, who own the means of production. And that
imbalance is the basis of a capitalist society. It's
what makes capitalism work. If you didn't have some
people who had all the power and other people
who could be forced to work, then you wouldn't
get commodity production and you wouldn't get exchange. Um
You know, that that system would not have emerged
in the same way. So this imbalance of power
sits at the heart of capitalist societies. It's the
source of exploitation. So capitalists profits come from the
fact that they pay workers the same as the
value of the goods that they produce, that's exploitation.
Um AND the kind of oppression of workers. So,
you know, keeping them in their place, dividing workers
into different kind of categories, dividing them geographically so
that some workers in very poor countries can be
paid very little, whereas other workers can be paid
slightly more. Um YOU know, all of these strategies
are designed to kind of exploit and oppress workers,
keep them down, stop them from organizing to like
um kind of even out that, that imbalance of
power, this imbalance of power basically is like the
foundation of capitalism. It has to be that some
people are in control and some people are oppressed
and excluded. So when workers start to come together
and organize in trade unions, you know, organized politically
and political parties as they do in the kind
of late 18 hundreds and uh and early 19
hundreds, that becomes a real threat to the development
of capitalism because suddenly, you know, you have workers
who can say we want higher wages, we want
better conditions or we're going on strike and you
won't have any labor to produce the commodities that
you're selling for a profit. Um So when this
starts to happen, this is, uh you know, around
the time that, that Marx is writing as well.
Um He realizes that this, you know, organizing, worker
organizing is this massive threat to the social division
of labor because when workers have real power, they're
able to really kind of make demands of, of
capitalists. And ultimately, he argues, if they get enough
power, workers will be able to take control of
the production process and just do it themselves, right?
And this is what I look at in the
book is um this question of do workers need
to be managed and controlled because it's like a
key part of capitalist ideology to say that workers
are stupid, kind of um irrational, like lazy, they
need someone telling them what to do. And actually
there's lots of examples of workers kind of organizing
themselves and managing themselves and doing so better than
the people who have been managing them before. So
this idea that you can move from this society
based on just a really sharp imbalance of power.
So some people up here with all the power,
all the wealth, some people down here forced to
just do as they're told through to a democratic
egalitarian system where power is shared, where decisions are
made collectively, where production is um undertaken by workers
working together. That's the kind of socialist argument really.
And it all rests on workers being able to
organize themselves and take that power back from the
people at the top of the economy.
So before we get into how workers have and
can organize themselves, uh let me just ask you
about this because it's another thing that really bothers
me a lot when I hear it on the
news and then when I hear politicians saying that
whenever there is an economic crisis and in 2008,
for example, we heard a lot of that, we
constantly hear uh politicians and business owners and people
like that saying on the media, for example, how
common citizens should be more mindful about, they spend
about the ways who spend their money, how public
spending should be cut, how we uh how we
are spending too much on state subsidies, state support
for the more most vulnerable people and stuff like
that. But doesn't that happen for businesses and companies?
I mean, don't they get public subsidies, state support
and sometimes they also get bailouts has happened a
lot in the 2008 financial crisis actually. So, I
mean, this isn't that a thing?
Yes, it was a really big thing. And um
it really undermines the argument that is made by
free market, neo liberal economists and policymakers. They say
they say that they want free markets and a
small state, right? Um So they want less state
spending and they want greater competition, all of these
sorts of things. Um BECAUSE that is supposed to
be a good thing that maximizes efficiency. It, you
know, makes everyone more wealthy. It spurs innovation, et
cetera. They have these great arguments for free market
systems that also rely on this idea that free
markets make us all free because we're free to
choose what we consume where we work, et cetera.
Now, there's problems with that argument in itself, but
the biggest issue is that, that is not how
capitalism works. It's like a, a veil, that argument
is designed to obscure what's really happening. So neoliberals
will use this argument. We want free markets, but
when they get power, they will undermine the free
market when it comes to subsidies for big businesses,
bailouts for banks bailouts for large corporations, you know,
tax cuts for large corporations. Um THEY'LL, you know,
undermine regulation for big businesses. So they'll create a
very uncompetitive market or almost corrupt environment. A lot
of the time for big businesses that often fund
these, these politicians, right? So the free market doesn't
apply to those at the top, but they'll impose
very, very rigidly, these free market principles on those
at the bottom. So they will cut state spending
on healthcare and social security um on public services.
They'll often raise taxes on um the less well
off they will um you know, uh undermine union
organizing, they impose anti union legislation, all of this
stuff aimed at imposing very, very rigorous competition on
workers and removing state support for workers whilst undermining
competition and increasing state support for big businesses and
financial institutions. Now, from a free market perspective, that
doesn't really make sense. It's like incomprehensible. Um It,
it means like competition for some people and no
competition for others. But when you understand the the
economy from a Marxist perspective, which is about who
has the power, right? And it's actually capitalists and
bosses, you have a huge amount of power over
our society and over our politics, it makes a
lot more sense because what the capitalists have done
is effectively um manipulated the government to make sure
that they get all the support and that workers
don't get any support. Now, this is kind of
always how things have worked, right? Like, you know,
this is how things have worked from since the
origins of capitalism. The issue is that today we
have this ideology that says, you know, the government
is just um promoting efficiency, it's just enforcing competition.
Um It's just, you know, making sure that we
don't spend too much money, right? So people believe
that the government is acting in everyone's interests when
actually it's generally acting in the interests of those
at the very top.
So let me ask you now, because the things
we've been talking about here are mostly about what
happens m mostly within societies, within countries. But in
the book, you also talk a little bit about
how countries from the global North continue to exploit
in different ways. Countries from the global South and
their respective populations even after the supposed end of
colonialism. So, could you tell us a little bit
about that?
Yeah. So empire and imperialism is a really important
part of how the system works. Um And the,
the kind of starting point for that um is
the fact that like large powerful businesses and the
people who own them are concentrated in rich countries,
whereas the workforce now is concentrated in poor countries.
So you'll often hear people saying Marxist analysis doesn't
apply anymore because most people in say England or
Europe or the US are middle class. So they're
not workers, they're not bosses, they're kind of middle
class managers or, you know, professional managerial workers, right?
What this argument misses is that this class divide
still works. It just works at the level of
the global economy. So when you look at the
global economy, it's very, very divided between a very,
very tiny class of people who own everything, who
own the businesses, who own the land, um who
kind of, you know, distribute all the money, then
a slightly larger but still very small class of
professional managers, accountants, lawyers, uh you know, finances, you
know, a managerial class who manage the production process
on behalf of those people at the very top
and then a massive class of workers and those
workers are generally located in very very poor countries.
And are still paid very low wages, still face
really horrendous conditions when they're producing things. Um And,
you know, are not well off and don't have
very many prospects. So this divide between workers and
bosses, it exists within, within all societies, but it's
clearest at the level of the global economy. Um
And the way that this is enforced is basically
rich companies are located in the US, the UK,
you know, all around Europe, they list on stock
markets in those countries. They lobby the governments of
those countries. They rely on banks that are located
in those countries. So owners are concentrated in the
global north, whereas workers are concentrated in the global
south. Um And to an extent, those powerful companies
have like bought off the governments in the rich
countries and concentrate slightly higher paying jobs in those
countries so that workers don't rebel. So in the
US UK Europe, um there are lots of kind
of managerial jobs that are all about managing a
global production process that pay slightly better and mean
that those relatively more powerful workers who live in
democracies who, you know, have like a significant amount
of power production process, they're paid slightly better wages.
Whereas the people who are doing the most kind
of dirty, horrible low paid jobs are less powerful,
have lower wages, but also are under authoritarian regimes.
They don't have many rights. They kind of struggle
to organize because they're often kind of you know,
beaten down and, and, and prevented from doing that
and they're not able to move. So this is
the thing, there's a big wage gap between the
global north and the global south. But because borders
are so rigidly policed, poor workers can't move to
rich countries, but businesses can move everywhere. So rich,
powerful businesses can produce all their commodities with low
paid workers in the global South, then sell those
commodities to relatively better paid consumers in the global
North. But the two can't move around, this capitalist
can move around everywhere, then they can offshore the
profits to a tax haven somewhere. So they don't
have to pay any tax and generally kind of,
you know, make use of the fact that capital
can move all around the world. But labor is,
is stuck. That's the kind of foundation of imperialism.
It's like the, the global division of labor, basically
the international division of labor. Um AND the way
it's enforced. But what I look at in the
book is how this system is, is policed and
enforced by international institutions and by very powerful governments.
And this is, you know, really interesting because we
think that we have this kind of liberal rules
based international system that's governed by international law. Um
That's about kind of promoting the free market and
all that sort of stuff when actually we have
a highly unequal global economy in which international institutions
are used to kind of beat down poor countries
and enrich powerful countries. And an example of this
I have is um the case of uh a
um a vulture fund um that brought up the
debt of the government of Zambia in the like
just after the financial crisis. So the Zambian economy
was really struggling. Um THE revenues for the government
were falling and it was obvious that Zambia was
gonna default on its debts. So this Irish fund
bought Zambian debt knowing that the country was going
to default. And when the country did default, they
sued the Zambian government. So basically took money out
of the one of the poorest countries in the
world to pay these powerful investors. And this is
a tool that's used to keep poor countries poor
and in rich countries in rich, rich countries at
their expense. And there's loads of other examples I
look at in the book that show that the
international in, you know, the international rules based system
is all about maintaining that divide between the rich
world and the poor world.
So just before we get into the last part
of our conversation here today, and I ask you
in what ways can people fight back against or
perhaps try to change the system in the ways
that are possible uh that people can do it.
And uh perhaps you can also give us a
few examples of how people can collectively organize and
stuff like that. What do you mean by freedom
in the book also to contrast with, uh to
contrast it with uh what capitalists usually mean by
freedom.
Yeah. So I think, you know, those on the
right have this pretty individualistic view of freedom. Uh
And the idea is that you're free if there's
not very much kind of standing in your way.
Um So, uh you know, if you are able
to work wherever you want, if you're able to
consume what you want to buy the products that
you want, um to kind of have, you know,
free, free speech and all those sorts of things.
Um And that individualistic view of freedom has some
merit, but it's very limited because it allows you
to make decisions within your life. But it doesn't
allow you to have an influence over the structure
of society. So, you know, you can choose what
products you consume, but you can't choose, you know,
what products are on the shelves or how much
carbon has been used in producing those products, the
working conditions of the people who have been producing
those products, you're faced with a bunch of different
products made by all these huge multinational corporations that
have little democratic or competitive accountability and you're just
presented with an option. And actually today, most of
the products that you see on your shelves when
you go to the supermarket say they're all produced
by like five different companies. So you don't even
have that kind of very limited view of freedom.
But that's like the view of freedom that they
have on the right. And that it's supposed to
underpin this idea that we need a free market
economy. I argue the kind of the Marxist view
of freedom is much more expansive than that. So
it's like, yes, you have freedom and autonomy within
your life, you are free to make decisions, but
you also have freedom over the structure of society.
So you have the freedom as a worker to
shape the decisions that are being made by the
firm within which you work. So, you know, you
have democratic control over the economy basically. Um AS
a citizen, you have real democracy. So not, not
the kind of like semi democracy that we have
here where you have, you know, you vote once
every four or five years. Um But you don't
get to choose the candidates, you don't get to
choose the policy agenda, you struggle actually to kind
of hold politicians to account once they get into
office and you actually aren't able to influence democratically
large areas of what goes on in the state.
So there's real democracy politically and there's also crucially
democratic control over where you live and over your
community. Um So, you know, you have control over
how your local municipal budget is spent. Um YOU
have control over kind of community institutions, you're like
engaged in what goes on in, in like your
place basically and all of these things require just
a massive transformation of the way society works. It
requires decentralization of power. It requires a transformation of
political parties, a demo democratization of the state and
crucially a democratization of the economy. So giving people
power and ownership over the economy basically. Um And
what all this is supposed to do is shift
the balance of power in favor of workers. So
take power away from capitalists and give it to
workers. And the only way to do that because
they're not gonna give power away willingly, the government
isn't gonna take power away from them because politicians
are in the pockets of big corporations, workers have
to organize. Citizens have to organize, everyone has to
organize, you know, get into a union organize to
like, you know, in your community even get out
onto the streets and, and you know, take part
in protest movements. There are lots of different ways
that you can organize, but basically people have to
come together to demonstrate their power. Um And you
know, what I like to say is that we
should be living in a, in an economy in
a country where politicians are as scared of the
people, voting for them as they are of the
people who are giving them money.
So tell us then about ways that you think
people can organize themselves in this context to try
to take back control over planning and democratize certain
institutions and perhaps even businesses themselves.
Yeah. So the first and most important thing uh
is to recognize that we live in highly individualistic
societies. Now, this is the big difference since Marx
was writing. Um YOU know, in Marx's time, uh
people were still kind of quite community oriented, they
were kind of other oriented. You had to co-operate
in order to survive with other people within your
community, with other people within your workplace. So it
was kind of easier to convince people join a
union, you know, join a political movement, like really
kind of take part in what's going on. The
biggest triumph of neoliberalism has been to convince us
that we are these isolated, atomized individuals who can't
trust each other, can't work with each other. We
have to be governed by someone else because we
can't co-operate. Um And what this does is it,
it kind of breaks us up and it makes
us less powerful and it makes us feel powerless
because if you think about it, if you're part
of a big union, right? And there's like loads
of you, it's your whole workplace and you're organizing
for higher wages, telling your boss we're going to
go on strike. If you don't give us higher
wages, you feel powerful, you feel part of something,
right? If you're just one worker and you aren't
getting paid enough, but you go to your boss
and you ask your boss as an individual for
a raise, they're probably gonna say no. And then
you're gonna blame yourself. You're gonna feel powerless. You're
gonna be like, I don't have any control over
my life. I don't have control over, you know,
the conditions in which I work. And so that
like, powerlessness is a really important part of what
keeps our system functioning is basically people think I
can only rely on myself. I can't organize with
other people. I can't trust other people. So it's
all up to me and it's just on me
to kind of compete and to struggle and to
push other people out of the way in order
to get what I want, right? Um And that
undermines our capacity to hold those at the top
to power because they're not going to listen to
any one person. It has to be a kind
of collective movement and a collective uh process of,
of kind of organizing and of struggle. Um And
like individualism has really undermined our capacity to do
that or even to imagine that you could be
part of a political movement that would change the
conditions of, of your existence. Um And like, it's,
that's been pushed in a number of different ways.
So Margaret Thatcher in the UK famously, there's no
such thing as society, there was a big effort
to break up the unions. So to use the
police use force basically, and the law to like
pull people apart. Um There's been a lot of
centralization in big cities, so little. So communities have
been kind of broken up. Um And all of
this along with kind of mass consumerism has really
promoted this ideology of um of individualism. So kind
of pushing back against that and encouraging people to
trust each other and to work together and to
organize is like the number one priority for anyone
who wants to see social change happen. Um And
you know, there, there are lots of examples as
as to how that can be done. And I
look at a load of those examples in the
book. Um So one of my favorite examples uh
comes from the UK and it's the Lucas plan.
So there was this firm called Lucas Aerospace that
was kind of potentially gonna go under. Um It
wasn't, you know, competing internationally. So the workers um
went to the government and said we need a
bailout, we need you to nationalize this firm so
we can keep our jobs. But the government said
we can't do that. But why don't you try
and put together uh you know, a plan to
save the firm? So these unionists uh all basically
like worked together and they consulted all of the
workers within this firm and said, how can we
save the firm? What can we start producing that
will make us competitive again? And they came up
with this plan called the Lucas plan, which was
designed entirely by workers. So all of the workers
within this firm said we're gonna stop producing weapons,
which is primarily what they were producing. And we're
gonna start producing healthcare equipment, environmental equipment like wind
turbines, um just socially useful products that we can
feel proud to make. And they then designed a
whole business plan about how uh showing how they
would transition from the current model to the new
model. Um You know, basically saying that, you know,
the workers would be uh would be owners of
the firm, they would run the firm. Um And
just kind of designing a whole new system for
operating this uh this giant company. And what that
shows, I think is it really undermines this idea
that people need to be managed and controlled and
that's really the foundation of a capitalist economy. It's
the idea that we can't trust each other, we
can't work together to achieve our collective goals. We
have to give our power to someone else so
that they can tell us what to do.
It's also, it's also that very common idea that
we hear many times that there's supposedly uh an
elite of people who are highly intelligent, highly capable
and you ju we just need to give them
all the money because they will make all the
right decisions and they will grow the economy and
everything will be better forever. I mean, something like
that.
Yeah, exactly. And that's actually what a lot of
kind of neo liberal and free market economists believe.
Um YOU know, I, I start the book by
looking at this quote from Hayek and he says,
freedom of thought will only ever be of relevance
to a small minority. Basically, most people are too
stupid to take advantage of the freedoms on offer
to them. Um Whereas, you know, the kind of
socialist view is that everybody has um intelligence, the
capacity to control their lives to work with other
people, everybody has skills, you know, everybody has these
unique capabilities that just need to be kind of
encouraged and developed so that everyone can flourish and
that we can all work together. And the best
way to do that is for us to come
together and teach each other, right? Um So a
lot of like the workers movement in the UK
and like around the world comes from groups of
workers who would come together and study capital, they
would study the Communist Manifesto often this was, you
know, they would learn how to read in this
context, right? It was through co-operatives of workers that
would teach each other and would learn from each
other and would work together to develop themselves and
to strengthen the group. Um And that I think
is something that has, has definitely been lost as
we've moved to this individualistic society. And if we're
ever gonna get out of the mess that we're
in today, we have to move away from individualism.
You know, there's not gonna be a powerful workers
movement or a powerful social movement capable of resisting
the power of capital. If we all are just
focused solely on ourselves, we need to have this
open collective consciousness that is going to kind of
drive forward progressive social change.
Yeah, it's actually very interesting that at a certain
point you mentioned there that of course, workers have
their own expertise and skills because I I mean,
isn't that obvious, isn't it obvious that in different
industries, the workers are the ones who actually have
the expertise in the specific kind of area they've
been through, went on and they work on because
many times the higher ups are just there to
try to extract money from labor and they know
nothing about how the products are created and anything
about, uh, I don't know, engineering, computer science or
whatever it might be.
Right. Yeah, exactly. Um, I have, uh, I know
someone who's a management consultant and, uh they say,
you know, whenever they're hired to go into a
firm, the first thing that the consultants do is
go and ask the workers, how is the product
made? What goes on around here? They don't, you
know, waste their time asking managers what's going on.
They try and like, you know, um, they try
and kind of please the managers so they'll spend
a lot of time talking to the managers being
like this is what we're gonna do, da da
da. But they get their information from the workers
because those are the ones who are actually kind
of producing the commodities and understand how these firms
work. Um And you know, there's loads of examples
that I look at in the book of like
workers who have taken control of the firms that
they work in, um, all throughout history and have
done so to great effect. There's lots of examples
of worker co-operatives, um and not also just in,
in commodities production also when it comes to house
building. For example, we have this idea of community
land trusts where a community comes together, buys a
parcel of land, builds housing on that. And then
the houses are all owned by the community and
support all the people living in that community. Um
And all of this, I think, you know, the
biggest, one of the biggest things that underlies individualism
is this idea that we're all kind of competitive
individuals who are just desperate to push each other
out of the way to get to the top,
right? And if you look at human psychology and
anthropology and sociology, that isn't how human societies work,
you know, we have learned to co-operate, we're one
of the most co-operative species alive, we compete between
groups. So you see that quite a lot, you
know, there are, there's competition between groups, but as
groups, we have learned how to cooperates and to
work together to survive. That's one of the like
distinguishing features of, of humanity. But those cooper impulses
have basically been crushed by a system that realizes
that if we co-operate, then we'll have power and
that will undermine the power of those at the
top. Um So individualism is this really important feature
of most capitalist economies. Um And it's particularly important
in the wealthy capitalist economies because those are the
places that workers have potentially a lot of power.
You know, if like the workers in America say,
we're able to form powerful unions, powerful political parties
and take, you know, put, put into uh into
government, a political party that was on the side
of organized labor that would transform the global economy,
not just the American economy. So it's very, very
important to the development of capitalism that they don't
do that, that they're divided by, you know, race
by geography um by this ideology that tells them
that they can't co-operate with one another because if
that wasn't the case, capitalism basically wouldn't survive.
So let me ask you one last question then
looking at the current state of global capitalism and
particularly, for example, something that I'm very worried about
the rise of the far right across many countries
in Europe, the US as well. Uh Or at
least some of the far right discourse that we
have now very commonly. Uh Are you optimistic about
uh I mean, people organizing themselves to really try
to take over the, the system because i it's
uh I, I mean, I would like to be
a little bit more optimistic myself but, uh over
and over historically and we're seeing it again right
now. People seem to fall very easily for the
sort of extreme right wing sort of narratives about,
oh, it's uh immigrants fault, it's the fault of
people. They're taking too much from the States, stuff
like that. And they never, ever, ever point the
finger at uh the ultra rich, the company owners
and stuff like that. So, I mean, are you
optimistic or not? And particularly also let me just
add one last thing, the current levels of economic
inequality that are rising. I mean, that also worries
me. So, what are your thoughts on that?
Yeah. So I wouldn't say I'm optimistic that if
things continue, we'll end up in a good place.
But I am optimistic that we can change things.
I believe that if we start now, we can
change the economies and the societies in which we
live. And I think the reason that we're seeing
the rise of the far, right at the moment
is that we're in this unique historical situation where
the vast majority of people recognize that capitalism isn't
working, that democracy isn't working in a lot of
places because it's been undermined by extreme inequality. Um
And so they know that this system is broken
that they're living in, but they feel powerless to
do anything about it. So, you know, there's lots
of people who feel very angry about inequality about
the fact that they're not paid enough to feed
their family. Um, THEY are, you know, angry about
that. They don't have housing, they're anxious about the
state of the world and everything that's going on.
But they don't have a sense of their collective
power to change anything because everything is as you,
as an individual. So you, as an individual feel
very powerless because you're not paid enough money. You
can't afford your house. You know, the world is
collapsing around you and you don't think, oh, I
need to organize with other people to change things.
You think you look other individuals and you think,
oh, that person has more money than me. That
person has, you know, more money than me or
whatever. And you think, oh, I'm gonna blame that,
you know, those, those individuals over there or that
group over there for taking something away from me,
right? Because you don't think the people at the
top of society need to be held to account.
That's not because you don't think that like taxes
should be higher or there should be more public
services or that, you know, billionaires should uh you
know, should be constrained and, and kind of controlled
a bit more. You do think those things but
you don't feel powerful enough to take on those
at the top of the economy. You know, you
look at politicians and you think they're all the
same. They never listen, look at kind of the
owners of big businesses and you just think, well,
they're operating on a different planet for me. There's
nothing I could do to kind of control them
or control businesses. So, you just think, how can
I control my little world and all you see
in that little world is you and then a
few other people who are kind of poorer than
you. But you think, oh, they're taking something away
from me, right? So migrants or people who are
on social security or whatever, um You don't feel
powerful enough to actually change the structure of the
system. You just think I just want to, you
know, move some pieces around and the very unfair
world that I inhabit. So if we want to
tackle the rise of the Far right, we need
to confront this sense of powerlessness that makes people
feel angry and angry enough to say it's migrants,
it's benefits scroungers and also angry enough to elect
politicians who say I'm gonna drain the swamp. I
know that the system isn't working. I'm just gonna
burn it to the ground. It's quite like a
nihilistic conspiratorial ideology that people on the Far right
often have, which is that they know that the
system isn't working. They know it's really unfair, but
instead of trying to organize together, they project their
political agency onto someone else like a Donald Trump
or Marine Le Pen. And that person says, I'm
going to save you. I'm going to kind of
tear down the whole system and build something better
in its place. So it's again a very individualistic
thing. It's like that person over there is gonna
rescue me. Um And you know, I think the
only way to push back against that is to
give people to respond to that sense of powerlessness
by giving people a sense of belonging in social
movements. And that could be any different kind of
social movement. So it can be like organizing in
your workplace as part of a union, it can
be organizing in your community. Um It can be,
you know, getting involved in a protest movement in
the environmental movement, in a tenant union, whatever. As
soon as you start pulling people out of this
individual box mindset and start encouraging them to see
much more openly the system in which they live
by organizing with other people, by realizing that they're
not alone that when they work with other people,
they have power, you start to chip away at
that individualism and you start to encourage people to
think. Well, actually, if I can, let's say, get
involved in this campaign to save my local library,
why can't I get involved in a wider political
campaign to change the structure of the society in
which I live? Um So that's why I think
it's so so important to start attacking individualism by
getting people involved in almost any kind of, of
collective organizing to shift their consciousness.
Great. So Grace, let's perhaps uh wrap up the
interview here. Let's send on that positive note. And
the book is again, vulture capitalism, corporate crimes, backdoor
bailouts and the death of freedom. I'm of course,
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And would you like to tell people
where they can find you on the internet?
Yeah, so you can find me on uh Twitter
X at Grace lately on Instagram at Grace lately
and on tiktok at Grace lately. Zero.
Great. So Grace. Thank you so much again for
doing this. It's been a really fun conversation. Yeah.
Thank you so much for having me. It's been
great. Thanks for it.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Wilson Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli
Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Bela
Gil Cortes Solis Scott Zachary, Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa, Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael
Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radis, Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris Tori Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No,
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis
Valentine Steinman Perros Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert. Liam
Dan Biar. Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Benedikt Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie.
Thank you for all.